ADDRESSES THE NATION TONIGHT IN
HIS SIXTH STATE OF THE UNION,
AND FOR THE FIRST TIME BEFORE A
HOUSE AND SENATE UNDER
REPUBLICAN CONTROL.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
WE BRING YOU SPECIAL COVERAGE
FROM THE U.S. CAPITOL AND
ANALYSIS FROM MARK SHIELDS AND
DAVID BROOKS.
>> Ifill: PLUS, ISLAMIC STATE
MILITANTS THREATEN TO KILL TWO
JAPANESE HOSTAGES UNLESS PAID A
TWO HUNDRED MILLION DOLLAR
RANSOM.
>> Woodruff: AND, A CALIFORNIA
PUBLIC SCHOOL SHIFTS ITS FOCUS
TO LIFE LESSONS, PREPARING
STUDENTS TO GO ON TO COLLEGE AND
CAREERS IN MEDICINE.
>> WE HAVE KIDS THAT GO TO EVERY
MAJOR HOSPITAL IN OAKLAND AND
THEY ARE STARTING TO TAKE SOME
OF THE REAL WORLD PRACTICAL
SKILLS THAT THEY ARE LEARNING ON
THE INTERNSHIPS BUT ALSO THE
THINGS THAT WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
IN CLASS AND THEY ARE STARTING
TO SYNTHESIZE THAT INTO THE
VISION THAT THEY SEE FOR
THEMSELVES.
>> Ifill: THO ARESE SOME OF THE
STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: IN JUST A FEW
HOURS, THE PRESIDENT ADDRESSES
CONGRESS AND THE NATION, LAYING
OUT HIS VIEW OF THE STATE OF THE
UNION AT THE START OF A NEW
YEAR.
HE SPENT THIS DAY PUTTING
FINISHING TOUCHES ON MANY OF THE
PROPOSALS HE'S ALREADY MADE
PUBLIC, WHILE REPUBLICANS
READIED THEIR OWN ARGUMENTS.
WE'LL HEAR FROM BOTH SIDES AFTER
OUR SUMMARY OF THE DAY'S OTHER
NEWS.
>> Ifill: AND THAT SUMMARY
BEGINS WITH NEW SIGNS THAT
BIPARTISANSHIP COULD YET BE
ELUSIVE: TWO NEW PRESIDENTIAL
VETO THREATS AIMED AT A PAIR OF
REPUBLICAN-SPONSORED BILLS.
ONE WOULD BAN ABORTIONS AFTER
THE FIRST 20 WEEKS OF PREGNANCY.
THE OTHER WOULD MANDATE
DECISIONS ON OIL AND GAS
PIPELINES WITHIN 12 MONTHS OF
BEING PROPOSED.
>> Woodruff: AN OIL PIPELINE
BREAK IN MONTANA HAS FORCED THE
TOWN OF GLENDIVE TO START
TRUCKING IN BOTTLED WATER.
ABOUT 50,000 GALLONS OF CRUDE
OIL SPILLED INTO THE YELLOWSTONE
RIVER ON SATURDAY.
THE TOWN DRAWS ITS WATER FROM
THE RIVER, AND  TESTS HAVE
CONFIRMED HAZARDOUS LEVELS OF
BENZENE, A CANCER-CAUSING
COMPONENT IN OIL.
IT'S UNCLEAR HOW LONG THE WATER
WILL BE FOULED
>> Ifill: IN FRANCE, POLICE
ARRESTED FIVE CHECHENS TODAY,
AMID A HEIGHTENED ALERT SINCE
THE PARIS ATTACKS.
THERE WAS NO IMMEDIATE
INDICATION THAT THE FIVE HAD ANY
CONNECTION TO TERRORISM.
INSTEAD, OFFICIALS IN TWO TOWNS
IN SOUTHERN FRANCE SAID THEY
WERE TIED TO OTHER CRIMES.
A CACHE OF EXPLOSIVES WAS FOUND
AS WELL.
>> ( translated ): WHAT I CAN
TELL YOU IS THAT WE HAVE FOUND
DURING A RAID AT ONE PERSON'S
PLACE, SOME EXPLOSIVE MATERIAL,
EXTREMELY DANGEROUS.
FOR THE MOMENT, WITH THE
INVESTIGATIONS WE CARRIED OUT,
WE HAVE NOT DETERMINED IF THEY
HAD A CURRENT BOMBING PROJECT.
WE ARE TALKING ABOUT CHARGES OF
FABRICATION AND POSSESSION OF
EXPLOSIVE MATERIAL.
>> Ifill: ALSO TODAY, FOUR MEN
SUSPECTED OF HAVING LINKS TO ONE
OF THE PARIS GUNMEN, AMEDY
COULIBALY, WERE CHARGED IN
PARIS.
COULIBALY DIED EARLIER THIS
MONTH IN A SHOOTOUT WITH FRENCH
POLICE.
>> Woodruff: JURY SELECTION HAS
BEGUN IN NEW YORK FOR A SAUDI
MAN LINKED TO THE 1998 U.S.
EMBASSY BOMBINGS IN AFRICA.LED D
FROM BRITAIN IN 2012.
HE'S ACCUSED OF CONSPIRING WITH
AL-QAEDA IN PLANNING THE ATTACKS
THAT KILLED 224 PEOPLE.
ANOTHER DEFENDANT ALREADY
PLEADED GUILTY.
A THIRD DIED BEFORE HE COULD BE
BROUGHT TO TRIAL.
>> Ifill: SHIITE REBELS IN YEMEN
SEIZED THE PRESIDENTIAL PALACE
TODAY, AFTER TAKING OVER STATE
MEDIA.
THEY ALSO SHELLED THE HOME OF
THE U.S.-BACKED PRESIDENT, ABED-
RABBU MANSOUR HADI, BUT HE WAS
UNHURT.
THE REBEL LEADER DEMANDED THAT
HADI QUICKLY IMPLEMENT A PEACE
ACCORD BROKERED BY THE UNITED
NATIONS.
BUT A SPOKEMAN FOR U.N.
SECRETARY GENERAL BAN KI-MOON
CONDEMNED THE VIOLENCE.
>> THE SECRETARY-GENERAL IS
GRAVELY CONCERNED ABOUT THE
DETERIORATING SITUATION IN
YEMEN.
THE SECRETARY-GENERAL CALLS ON
ALL SIDES TO IMMEDIATELY CEASE
ALL HOSTILITIES, EXERCISE
MAXIMUM RESTRAINT, AND TAKE THE
NECESSARY STEPS TO RESTORE FULL
AUTHORITY TO THE LEGITIMATE
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTIONS.
>> Ifill: THE U.N. SECURITY
COUNCIL HELD AN EMERGENCY
MEETING THIS AFTERNOON, AND
ISSUED A STATEMENT SAYING
PRESIDENT HADI IS "THE
LEGITIMATE AUTHORITY" IN YEMEN.
>> Woodruff: INVESTIGATORS IN
INDONESIA HAVE CONCLUDED AN AIR-
ASIA PLANE WAS CLIMBING MUCH TOO
FAST BEFORE IT CRASHED LAST
MONTH.
THE TRANSPORT MINISTER SAID
TODAY THE JET WAS RISING AT
6,000 FEET A MINUTE.
THAT'S MORE THAN TRIPLE THE
NORMAL RATE, AND IT COULD HAVE
CAUSED THE PLANE TO STALL.
THE PILOTS HAD ASKED TO CLIMB TO
AVOID A STORM, BUT GROUND
CONTROLLERS DENIED PERMISSION.
>> Ifill: IN ECONOMIC NEWS,
THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
LOWERED ITS FORECAST OF GLOBAL
GROWTH FOR THE NEXT TWO YEARS.
AND, CHINA REPORTED ITS GROWTH
IN 2014 WAS THE SLOWEST IN
NEARLY A QUARTER-CENTURY,
AT 7.4%.
THE GLOBAL NEWS HELD WALL STREET
MOSTLY IN CHECK.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED JUST THREE POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 17,515.
THE NASDAQ ROSE 20 POINTS TO
CLOSE NEAR 4,655.
AND THE S&P 500 ADDED THREE, TO
FINISH AT 2,022.
>> Woodruff: AND, THERE'S GOOD
NEWS TODAY ABOUT TIGERS:
THEIR NUMBERS IN THE WILD IN
INDIA HAVE INCREASED NEARLY A
THIRD SINCE 2010.
A GOVERNMENT REPORT TODAY CITED
IMAGES COLLECTED AT NEARLY
10,000 CAMERA TRAPS.
INDIA IS HOME TO 2,200 TIGERS--
70% OF THE WORLD'S POPULATION.
THE COUNTRY HAS PLEDGED TO
CONSTRUCT NEW PRESERVES, TO KEEP
THE BIG CATS IN THEIR NATURAL
HABITAT.
>> WE HAVE PROACTIVELY DECIDED
THAT WE WILL CREATE MORE
GRASSLANDS AND WATER STORAGE IN
FOREST AREAS SO THAT THE ANIMALS
WILL LIVE HAPPILY IN FORESTS AND
PEOPLE WILL LIVE HAPPILY ALONG
THE SIDE OF THE FOREST ALSO, AND
NO ONE WILL INTRUDE UPON
ANYBODY'S TERRITORY.
>> Woodruff: THE WORLD WILDLIFE
FUND ESTIMATES THE WORLD LOST
97% OF ITS TIGERS IN THE LAST
CENTURY.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR:
FROM THE WHITE HOUSE TO CAPITOL
PRESIDENT'S STATE OF THE UNION
ADDRESS.
THEN, ISLAMIC STATE MILITANTS
MAKE RANSOM DEMANDS FOR TWO
JAPANESE HOSTAGES.
A DIVIDED SUPREME COURT WEIGHS
IN ON WHETHER JUDICIAL
CANDIDATES SHOULD BE ABLE TO
PERSONALLY RAISE CAMPAIGN CASH.
JURY SELECTION BEGINS IN THE
TRIAL OF JAMES HOLMES, THE MAN
HARGCED WITH THE 2012 MASS
SHOOTING AT A COLORADO MOVIE
THEATER.
AND, CONNECTING THE CLASSROOM TO
PROMISING CAREERS IN MEDICINE
AND BIOTECH.
>> Ifill: IT IS ONE OF THE FEW
EXPLICIT TASKS THE U.S.
CONSTITUTION REQUIRES OF EACH
PRESIDENT-- REGULARLY GIVING
CONGRESS A SENSE OF THE STATE OF
THE UNION.
IN THE HOURS BEFORE HIS SPEECH
TONIGHT, PRESIDENT OBAMA SAT
DOWN WITH A FEW OF THE PEOPLE HE
PLANS TO HIGHLIGHT.
AND ON REPUBLICAN-CONTROLLED
CAPITOL HILL, NEWLY MINTED
SENATE LEADER MITCH McCONNELL
CALLED FOR BIPARTISAN PROPOSALS.
>> WHAT I HOPE TO HEAR FROM THE
PRESIDENT TONIGHT IS AN EMPHASIS
ON THINGS THAT WE CAN AGREE ON.
THINGS THAT GIVE US A CHANCE TO
ACTUALLY ADVANCE THE AGENDA OF
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE.
I THINK ANY PRESIDENT IN THIS
SITUATION HAS A CHOICE: HE CAN
SORT OF ACT LIKE HE'S STILL
RUNNING FOR OFFICE, OR HE CAN
FOCUS ON THE THINGS THAT WE HAVE
A CHANCE TO REACH AN AGREEMENT
ON.
>> Ifill: POLITICAL EDITOR LISA
DESJARDINS IS AT THE CAPITOL,
WHERE LAWMAKERS ARE PREPARING
FOR THE PRESIDENT'S ADDRESS.
LISA, YOU'RE UP ON THE HILL.
YOU HAVE BEEN TALKING TO PEOPLE.
WE JUST HEARD MITCH McCONNELL
SAID HE HOPED THE PRESIDENT
WOULD STEP UP, AND WE ALSO HEARD
THE PRESIDENT ISSUE TWO VETO
THREATS TODAY.
WHAT IS THE MOOD UP THERE?
>> I HAVE TO SAY T'S
PALPABLE LACK OF EXCITEMENT FOR
SUCH AN IMPORTANT OCCASION.
I LOVE THESE.
THIS IS A FASCINATING AND
IMPORTANT PART OF AMERICAN
GOVERNMENT.
BUT THERE'S A SENSE HERE OF NOT
ONLY GRIDLOCK BUT INCREDIBLE
DIVIDE.
FROM BOTH DEMOCRATS AND
REPUBLICANS ON AND OFF THE
RECORD, THEY ALL SAY NO MATTER
WHAT THE PRESIDENT PROPOSES, IT
MAY BE INTERESTING, YOU MAY
AGREE OR DISAGREE, THEY DON'T
THINK HIS PROPOSALS WILL GO FAR,
AND THAT'S LED TO A SENSE OF LOW
EXPECTATIONS AND LOW EXCITEMENT
TONIGHT, I HAVE TO SAY.
>> Ifill: LET'S TALK ABOUT THE
EXPECTATIONS OF THE WHITE HOUSE
WHERE THEY'RE DETERMINEDLY
UPBEAT ABOUT THIS, TALKING ABOUT
CLOSING THE GAP FOR THE MIDDLE
CLASS.
IS THAT RESONATING ON CAPITOL
HILL?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
OF ALL THE THINGS THE PRESIDENT
PLANS TO TALK ABOUT, HOUSING,
EDUCATION, THERE IS ONLY ONE
TOPIC ANYONE IS TALKING ABOUT
TONIGHT AND THAT IS THE TAX PLAN
THE PRESIDENT IS GOING TO
PRESENT TO HELP THE MIDDLE
CLASS.
FROM THE REPUBLICANS' POINT OF
VIEW, THEY SAY IT'S A SHIFT IN
WEALTH.
THEY SAY THEY WERE GENERALLY
SURPRISED AND SAID THIS COULD
HURT CHANCES FOR TAX REFORM.
ON THE OTHER HAND, DEMOCRATS
HAVE A SENSE THEY SAY OF THE
PRESIDENT THAT THEY WANTED TO
SEE THIS ENTIRE TIME.
ONE DEMOCRAT SAID THE PRESIDENT
HAS BEEN SADDLED WITH WARS AND
RECESSION AND SAYS NOW THE
PRESIDENT IS FREED OF THOSE
BURDENS AND BEING THE DEMOCRAT
THE DEMOCRATS WANTED TO SEE ALL
THE TIME.
>> Ifill: BUT REPUBLICANS ARE
IN CONTROL THIS TIME.
YOU'VE COVERED THE PAST STATE OF
THE UNION.
DOES IT APPEAR THE REPUBLICANS
ARE IN CONTROL TONIGHT?
>> IT DOES.
REPUBLICANS ARE WATCHING THE
SPEECH, PREPARING THE RESPONSES
EN MASSE.
THEY ARE NOT HAPPY WITH WHAT THE
PRESIDENT HAS SO FAR REVEALED
AND ARE PUTTING IT IN A WAY THEY
THINK COMPROMISE WILL BE MORE
DIFFICULT TO GET.
WHO YOU BLAME IS UP TO YOU.
REPUBLICANS ARE CLEARLY BLAMING
THE PRESIDENT.
>> Ifill: LISA DESJARDINS ON
THE HILL FOR US TONIGHT.
THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: WE GO NOW TO THE
WHITE HOUSE FOR A PREVIEW OF THE
ADDRESS FROM JENNIFER PALMIERI,
ASSISTANT TO THE PRESIDENT AND
DIRECTOR OF COMMUNICATIONS.
I SPOKE WITH HER A SHORT TIME
AGO.
MILLIONS OF AMERICANS WATCHING
THE PRESIDENT TONIGHT.
WHAT'S HE SAYING HE WANTS TO GET
ACROSS THE THEM?
>> HE'S GOING TO TALK ABOUT THE
PROGRESS THE PRESIDENT IS
MAKING.
THEY THINK THE MIDDLE CLASS WILL
FIGHT BACK.
HE WANTS TO EXPLAIN TO THE
AMERICAN PUBLIC WHAT WE NEED TO
DO TO FINISH THE JOB OF CLOSING
THE GAP FOR MIDDLE CLASS AND
DEAL WITH THE PROBLEM OF
DECLINING WAGES.
SO HE WOULD HAVE AND HE REFERRED
TO THIS AS MIDDLE CLASS
ECONOMICS THAT IN CONTRAST TO
TRICKLE-DOWN ECONOMICS, THAT WE
BELIEVE THE ECONOMY IS NOT JUST
ABOUT THE UPPER-MIDDLE CLASS,
BUT THE ECONOMY CAN'T SUSTAIN
ITSELF.
NO MATTER HOW MUCH YOU WANT IT
TO, WITHOUT A HEALTHY MIDDLE
CLASS.
YOU KNOW, FOR PURCHASING POWER,
BUYING HOMES, ET CETERA, THIS IS
STUFF WE DO NOT JUST TO HELP THE
MIDDLE CLASS BUT TO
STRONGER ECONOMY OVERALL SO
THEY'LL HAVE SPECIFIC IDEAS OF
WHAT HE THINKS THE STEPS ARE
THAT WE NEED TO MAKE TO DO THAT.
>> Woodruff: WHAT IS HIS
MESSAGE TO CONGRESSIONAL
REPUBLICANS ALREADY OUT THERE
SAYING THIS TAX PROPOSAL TO
ESSENTIALLY RAISE SOME TAXES ON
THE VERY WEALTHY IN ORDER TO
GIVE SOME TAX CREDITS TO PEOPLE
WITH MODERATE INCOME, THEY'RE
SAYING THIS IS A POKE IN THE EYE
TO REPUBLICANS AND IT'S GOING
NOWHERE.
>> SO I THINK FIRST OF ALL IN
THE STATE OF THE UNION, THE
PRESIDENT'S JOB IS TO PRESENT TO
THE COUNTRY THESE ARE THE STEPS
I THINK WE NEED TO TAKE TO FACE
OUR BIGGEST CHALLENGE WHICH IS
HELPING STOP THIS MIDDLE CLASS
SLIDE.
SO HE'S NOT GOING TO TRIM HIS
SAILS ABOUT WHAT THAT ANSWER IS
BECAUSE, YOU KNOW, OF WHAT
REPUBLICANS MAY HAVE SAID IN
ADVANCE OF THE SPEECH, YOU KNOW,
THAT THE ANSWER IS THE ANSWER.
BUT WHAT WE WOULD ASK THEM TO
LOOK AT IS LOOK AT THE IDEAS.
ONE OF OUR REVENUE-RAISING IDEAS
IS SOMETHING THAT THE CHAIRMAN
OF THE HOUSE, WAYS AND MEANS
COMMITTEE HAS SUPPORTED.
BUT MOREOVER, EVERYONE WANTS TO
FIGURE OUT HOW WE CAN EXPAND THE
MIDDLE CLASS.
THESE ARE IDEAS TO HELP BRING
THAT ABOUT.
IT'S IN THE INTEREST OF THE
ECONOMY OVERALL TO MAKE THE
CHANGES.
THIS IS NOT CLASS WARFARE OR
PITTING ONE SIDE AGAINST EACH
OTHER.
WE NEED TO MAKE SURE THE MIDDLE
CLASS IS SUCCEEDING.
THE ECONOMY WON'T THRIVE TILL
THAT HAPPENS.
>> Woodruff: DO YOU THINK
THERE'S A COMPROMISE REACHABLE
THAT ISN'T WHAT THE REPUBLICANS
CALL REDISTRIBUTION OF WEALTH IS
>> WE BELIEVE TAX REFORM WILL BE
A PART OF WHAT THIS CONGRESS IS
WORKING ON.
WE WANT TO MAKE SURE -- WE WANT
TO WORK WITH THEM ON IT, WE WANT
TO WORK ON TAX REFORM IN A WAY
THAT HELPS THE MIDDLE CLASS.
THIS IS THE OPENING THE
PRESIDENT IS HAVING WITH THE
CONGRESS, ALMOST.
WE WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT THE
MIDDLE CLASS IS PART OF THAT
DISCUSSION AND BROADEN IT OUT SO
WHEN CONGRESS IS DEBATING THE
THESE ISSUES THAT THEY'RE
LOOKING AT A FULL GAMUT OF
LEGISLATIVE OPTIONS AND NOT
SOMETHING PARTICULARLY NARROW.
WE'LL START TONIGHT AND HOPE
REPUBLICANS WILL LISTEN WITH AN
OPEN EAR AND MIND AND WE'LL TAKE
IT FROM THERE, BUT THESE ARE THE
STEPS THE COUNTRY NEEDS TO TAKE
IN ORDER TO DEAL WITH THIS
CONTINUED PROBLEM OF INEQUALITY.
SO HE'S GOING TO LAY THAT OUT.
THESE ARE THE ANSWER WE BELIEVE
WE NEED TO DO.
>> Woodruff: WELL, WE WILL ALL
BE LISTENING HERE.
JENNIFER PALMIERI, THANK YOU.
>> THANKS, JUDY.
>> Woodruff: WE GO BACK TO
CAPITOL HILL FOR A REPUBLICAN
TAKE ON STATE OF THE UNION.
IT COMES FROM TEXAS CONGRESSMAN
MAC THORNBERRY, CHAIR OF THE
HOUSE ARMED SERVICES COMMITTEE.
CONGRESSMAN THORNBERRY, THANK
YOU VERY MUCH FOR JOINING US.
WE JUST HEARD FROM JENNIFER
PALMIERI, THE WHITE HOUSE ABOUT
THE PRESIDENT'S PLAN, AMONG
OTHER THINGS, TO EXPAND THE
ECONOMIC B RECOVERY SO THAT IT
REACHES MORE AMERICANS INCLUDING
WORKING CLASS, MIDDLE CLASS
AMERICANS.
WHY ISN'T THAT A WORTHY GOAL?
>> WELL, IT IS CERTAINLY A
WORTHY GOAL TO GROW THE ECONOMY
AND EXPAND THE RECOVERY SO THAT
EVERYBO ISDY INCLUDED IN IT.
BUT UNFORTUNATELY, THE
PRESIDENT'S PROPOSAL IS NOT
SERIOUS.
IT WOULD HAVE BEEN THE SAME AS
IF GEORGE W. BUSH HAD COME TO
CONGRESS IN 2007, WHEN THE
DEMOCRATS HAD JUST TAKEN
CONTROL, AND SAID, I PROPOSE A
$320 BILLION TAX CUT.
HE KNOWS THAT THIS CONGRESS WILL
NOT CONSIDER IT.
SO HE'S TRYING TO MAKE POLITICAL
POINTS.
REALLY, WE NEED A PRESIDENT WHO
WILL RISE ABOVE THAT SORT OF
POLITICS AND REALLY TRY TO SOLVE
THE PROBLEMS THAT ARE FACING
THIS COUNTRY, INCLUDING ANEMIC
ECONOMIC GROWTH.
>> Woodruff: WHAT WOULD YOU
LIKE TO SEE DONE TO EXPAND THIS
RECOVERY TO THE MIDDLE CLASS?
>> WELL, A KEY THING THAT THE
REGULATIONS AND THE FEAR OF
GOVERNMENT ARE HOLDING DOWN THE
RECOVERY.
BUSINESSES DON'T EXPAND.
PART OF THAT IS ObamaCare.
PART OF IT IS THE BLIZZARD OF
REGULATIONS E.P.A. AND EVERYBODY
ELSE IS SENDING OUR WAY.
THAT MAKES IT HARDER FOR
BUSINESSES TO GROW AND LESS
LIKELY JOBS WILL BE CREATED.
SO YOU HAVE THIS TREMENDOUS
UNDEREMPLOYMENT THAT'S NOT
REFLECTED IN THE UNEMPLOYMENT
RATE BUT IT'S LOTS OF FOLKS WHO
WOULD LIKE A JOB OR A BETTER JOB
AND THOSE OPPORTUNITIES ARE JUST
NOT OUT THERE.
>> Woodruff: DO YOU THINK
THERE IS COMMON GROUND BETWEEN
WHERE THE PRESIDENT IS AND
CONGRESSIONAL REPUBLICANS ARE?
>> I THINK THERE COULD BE.
WHAT COMES TO MY MIND IS HOPE
SPRINGS ETERNAL.
BUT AS YOU KNOW, THE PRESIDENT
STARTED THIS YEAR BY ISSUING A
SERIES OF VETO THREATS.
HE COMES AND BASICALLY IS POKING
HIS FINGER IN THE EYE OF THE NEW
CONGRESS.
SO I'M GETTING LESS -- I'M
FEELING MORE DISILLUSIONED, TO
TELL YOU THE TRUTH, THAT THE
PRESIDENT HAS ANY INTEREST IN
WORKING WITH CONGRESS.
I THINK, AS I SAY, IT'S MAINLY
ABOUT POLITICAL POINT SCORING.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY,
CONGRESSMAN, AS THE NEW CHAIRMAN
OF THE HOUSE ARMED SERVICES
COMMITTEE, WHAT ARE YOU GOING TO
BE LISTENING FOR FROM THE
PRESIDENT TONIGHT WHEN IT COMES
TO DEFENSE AND FOREIGN POLICY IN
THIS COUNTRY?
>> WELL, I WOULD LOVE TO HEAR A
STRATEGY FROM THE PRESIDENT THAT
WAS ADEQUATE TO MEET THE THREATS
THAT WE SEE AROUND THE WORLD.
JUST WHAT'S HAPPENED TODAY IN
YEMEN, FOR EXAMPLE.
AGAIN, I WOULD REALLY LIKE TO
SEE A PRESIDENT WHO WOULD
SINCERELY SAY I WANT TO WORK
WITH CONGRESS TO ADDRESS THESE
PROBLEMS, WHETHER IT IS
CYBERSECURITY OR WHETHER IT'S
TERRORISM OR THE UKRAINE OR WHAT
CHINA IS DOING, RATHER THAN JUST
SAYING IT AND THEN NOT FOLLOWING
UP, WE NEED SOMEONE WHO WILL SAY
IT AND THEN FOLLOW UP AND REALLY
BE A PARTNERSHIP BECAUSE THAT'S
THE ONLY WAY WE'LL PROVIDE FOR
OUR COUNTRY'S SECURITY OR SOLVE
OUR OTHER PROBLEMS.
THESE TWO BRANCHES OF GOVERNMENT
HAVE TO WORK TOGETHER AND THE
PRESIDENT HAS TO BE THE LEADER
IN THAT.
>> Woodruff: CONGRESSMAN MAC
THORNBERRY, CHAIRMAN OF THE
HOUSE ARMED SERVICES COMMITTEE.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: HOW MUCH OF TONIGHT'S
ADDRESS WILL BE ABOUT POMP AND
PAGEANTRY, BUT ALSO ABOUT
POLICY.
PRESIDENTS OFTEN PRESENT
CONGRESS WITH A LIST OF THEIR
PRIORITIES, WHICH OFTEN DO NOT
ALWAYS MESH WITH WHAT LAWMAKERS
HAVE IN MIND.
SO HOW MUCH OF IT ACTUALLY
BECOMES LAW?
POLITICAL DIRECTOR DOMENICO
MONTANARO HAS BEEN CRUNCHING THE
NUMBERS.
DOMENICO, AS THE PRESIDENT LAYS
OUT HIS PLAN FOR WHAT IT IS HE
WANTS TO DO, WHAT IS IT THAT WE
WANT T -- WHAT IS IT THAT WE SEE
HAPPENED?
>> THERE WERE ABOUT 18 ITEMS
THAT WERE PROPOSALS THAT HE
WANTED CONGRESS THE ACT ON.
JUST TWO OF THOSE THINGS
ACTUALLY MADE IT THROUGH
CONGRESS, WHEN YOU LOOK AT IT.
ON JOB RETRAINING AND ON
INCREASING RESEARCH FUNDING.
ON INCREASING RESEARCH FUNDING,
TOO, A LOT OF PEOPLE SAY, WELL,
IT WASN'T REALLY THAT MUCH OF AN
INCREASE BECAUSE IN THE YEAR END
OF THE BUDGET IT ONLY WENT UP
1.7% WHICH KEPT WITH INFLATION,
SO NOT MUCH OF AN INCREASE
THERE.
WHEN YOU LOOK AT SOME OF THE
ITEMS THAT WERE BIG-TICKET ITEMS
THE PRESIDENT CALLED FOR THAT
DIDN'T GET ADDRESSED, YOU LOOK
AT THINGS LIKE UNIVERSAL PRE-K,
RAISING THE MINIMUM-WAGE,
CUTTING OIL AND GAS SUBSIDIES,
THOSE AND 13 OTHER ITEMS DIDN'T
GET THROUGH.
NOW, THE WHITE HOUSE WILL SAY
THAT THERE ARE PLENTY OF OTHER
WAYS TO GO ABOUT GETTING ACTION
DONE, LIKE EXECUTIVE ACTION,
ENCOURAGING STATES AND THAT THE
SOME OF WHAT YOU SAW THEM ROLL
OUT LAST YEAR.
>> WHICH IS WHAT'S MAKING
EVERYBODY SO UNHAPPY ON CAPITOL
HILL.
TO BE FAIR, LET'S COMPARE THE
THIS TO HOW OTHER PRESIDENTS
HAVE DONE.
THE STATE OF THE UNION ADDRESS
YIELDS ACTUAL POLICY AND LAW?
>> THIS IS PRETTY MUCH PAR FOR
THE COURSE WHEN YOU LOOK AT
DIVIDED GOVERNMENT.
THE ONLY TIMES YOU REALLY SEE A
LOT THAT GETS THROUGH IS WHEN
PRESIDENTS HAVE BIG NUMBERS.
YOU LOOK BACK TO L.B.J. IN 1965,
HIS STATE OF THE UNION ADDRESS
WITH A LOT OF GREAT SOCIETY
MEASURERS, SURE, A LOT OF THOSE
GOT THROUGH, BUT AFTER THAT, NOT
MUCH ELSE FROM L.B.J. EVEN.
PRESIDENT OBAMA IN HIS FIRST TWO
YEARS, EARL, IS WHEN HE HAD BIG
NUMBERS, HE WAS ABLE TO GET
THROUGH HEALTHCARE, THE
STIMULUS, BUT BEYOND THAT IT'S
MUCH OF WHAT WE'VE SEEN.
>> Ifill: AND SOMETIMES WE
WERE TALKING ABOUT SMALL ITEMS,
NOT NECESSARILY BIG ONES.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
EVERYBODY TALKS ABOUT PRESIDENT
CLINTON AND SCHOOL UNIFORMS AND
THINGS LIKE THAT.
AS LOT OF THE SMALLER ITEMS THAT
WIND UP GETTING PUSHED THROUGH.
I THINK JOB RETRAINING IS AN
IMPORTANT THING THAT THE
PRESIDENT AND REPUBLICANS WERE
WILLING TO WORK TOGETHER ON BUT
SOME OF THE HOE-HANGING FREIGHT
IS WHAT FOR THE MOST PART IN
DIVIDED GOVERNMENT OUTER ABLE TO
GET DONE.
AND THERE MAY BE THINGS LIKE
THAT TONIGHT THAT THE PRESIDENT
IS ABLE TO TALK ABOUT ON THINGS
LIKE TRADE AND CYBERSECURITY,
YOU WILL WAIT AND SEE WHAT THE
RESULTS ARE.
>> Ifill: I KNOW YOU WILL BE
SCRUBBING THE NUMBERS TONIGHT.
DOMENICO MONTANARO, THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: AND NOW FOR SOME
PRE-SPEECH ANALYSIS FROM SHIELDS
AND BROOKS.
THAT'S SYNDICATED COLUMNIST MARK
SHIELDS AND "NEW YORK TIMES"
COLUMNIST DAVID BROOKS.
DAVID, WITH THE GLOOMY OUTLOOK
WE HEARD FROM DOMENICO AND
CONGRESS THEN THORNBERRY SAYING
THIS IS A POKE IN THE EYE, WHAT
CAN WE HOPE TO GET ACCOMPLISHED?
>> AS YOU HEARD THE
ADMINISTRATION TALK ABOUT THE
SPEECH, WHAT'S INTERESTING TO ME
IS IT'S NOT THAT LEGISLATIVE.
A LITTLE MORE RHETORIC THIS YEAR
AND LESS LAUNDRY LIST.
THEY WANT TO SHOW THE COUNTRY
THAT THEY GET THE MIDDLE CLASS
AND WANT TO TAKE CREDIT FOR THE
ECONOMY.
AS FOR THE POLICIES, YOU CAN
PICK THE SIX PIECES OF
LEGISLATION MOST LIKELY TO PASS
OR THE SIX WHERE YOUR PARTY HAS
A 70-30 PROPOSING ADVANTAGE AND
PUT THE OTHER PARTY IN A
DIFFICULT POSITION.
THEY'RE GOING FOR THE 70-30.
THEY'RE SAYING DO WE TAX THE
RICH AND THEY'RE GOING TO HIT
THEM WITH THAT, TRY TO SCORE
POLITICAL POINTS.
>> Ifill: SENATOR LEADER
McCOME SAID TODAY THIS WOULD
BE THE PRESIDENT'S FINAL ACT,
THIS SPEECH TONIGHT.
IS IT?
>> HARDLY HIS FINAL ACT, GWEN,
BUT IT IS PROBABLY HIS LAST
CHANCE TO SET THE AGENDA BARRING
A CRISIS IN 2016 BECAUSE A YEAR
FROM NOW WE'LL BE IN THE MIDDLE
OF THE CAMPAIGN WEEKS AWAY FROM
IOWA CAUCUSES, NEW HAMPSHIRE
PRIMARIES AND THE TERMS OF THE
DEBATE WILL HAVE BEEN SET.
THE PRESIDENT HAS A CHANCE AND I
THINK IS SEIZING IT TONIGHT TO
SET THE TERPS OF DEBATE NOT
SIMPLY FOR 015 AND THE CONGRESS
BUT FOR ESTABLISHING THE LACK OF
OPPORTUNITY, DECLINING
OPPORTUNITY IN THIS COUNTRY FOR
PEOPLE ACROSS THE BOARD AND
INCOME INEQUALITY AND WEALTH
INEQUALITY.
MITT ROMNEY, 2012, IN HIS MAIDEN
SPEECH LAUNCHING HOPES FOR 2016
TALKED ABOUT INCOME INEQUALITY.
THE PRESIDENT SPEAKS FROM A
POSITION OF STRENGTH, A WEEK IN
POLITICS IS A LIFETIME, TWO
WEEKS AN ETERNITY.
HIS NUMBERS ARE UP AND PEOPLE
FEEL BETTER ABOUT HIM.
>> Ifill: WE HAVE THE NUMBERS.
>> Woodruff: THE JANUARY
NUMBERS 46% AVERAGE APPROVAL IN
THE POLLS COMPARED TO 43% IN
DECEMBER.
ONLY A LITTLE BIT OF A BUMP, BUT
DOES SOMETHING LIKE THAT MAKE A
DIFFERENCE IN WHAT HE CAN GET
DONE.
>> IT HAS AN EFFECT ON THE
RALEMO OF THE WHITE HOUSE.
WE'VE HAD THE RAGAN-CLINTON
MODEL WHERE THEY GO UP, END
HIGH.
THE GEORGE BUSH MODEL WHERE THEY
GO DOWN, THE JIMMY CARTER IN THE
MIDDLE.
HE WAS LOOKING LIKE HE'S ON THE
BUSH TRAJECTORY BUT HE'S IN THE
MIDDLE NOW.
IT'S ABOUT INTERNAL MORALE.
I THINK THEY'RE FEELING
COMBATIVE IN THE WHITE HOUSE.
THEY'RE NOT EXPECTING TO GET A
LOT DONE.
BUT THE ECONOMY IS PICKING UP.
YOU LOOK AT THE REST OF THE
WORLD, WE ARE IN A STRONG
ECONOMY.
THE STRUCTURAL PROBLEMS ARE THE
SAME.
NO BEHEADINGS, PUTIN HASN'T DONE
MUCH, WE'VE HAD A PERIOD OF
RELATIVE CALM AROUND THE WORLD.
>> Ifill: MY FAVORITE NUMBERS
ARE COMPARING THIS PRESIDENT'S
NEXT TO LAST STATE OF THE UNION
SPEECH TO OTHER ONES.
PRESIDENT BUSH WAS AT 36%
APPROVAL AT THIS POINT IN HIS
TERM AND BILL CLINTON POST
LEWINSKY WAS AT 69%.
SO MAYBE IT DOESN'T MATTER.
>> POST IMPEACHMENT.
REMEMBER THIS, GWEN, BILL
CLINTON LAID DOWN THE PREDICATE
THAT AL GORE CARRIED THE POPULAR
VOTE IN 2000.
IN OTHER WORDS, BECAUSE PEOPLE
WERE OPTIMISTIC ABOUT THE
COUNTRY AND SATISFIED WITH HIS
PERFORMANCE, THE SAME THING,
THAT GROWING OPTIMISM SETS THE
TERMS OF THE 2016 ELECTION.
JUDY'S POINT ABOUT THE 46%, 43
IN DECEMBER, I JUST POINT OUT HE
WAS AT 40% FOR MOST OF 2014.
HE WAS REALLY DOWN AND IT IS A
SURGE.
WE HAVE FEWER PEOPLE
DISSATISFIED WITH THE ECONOMY
NOW, MORE SATISFIED ACTUALLY
THAN ANYTIME IN THE LAST NINE
YEARS.
SO THERE IS A SENSE OF RESURGENT
THE TWO OF YOU WILL JOIN US FOR
THE SPECIAL STATE OF THE UNION
ADDRESS TONIGHT, 9:00 EASTERN ON
YOUR LOCAL PBS STAIGS AROUND
THROUGHOUT THE EVENING ONLINE.
>> Ifill: THE PRESIDENT WILL BE
TALKING ABOUT FOREIGN POLICY
TONIGHT AS WELL, EVEN AS EVENTS
CONTINUE TO UNFOLD ABROAD.
THE ISLAMIC STATE GROUP RELEASED
ANOTHER HOSTAGE VIDEO TODAY,
THREATENING TO KILL TWO JAPANESE
NATIONALS IF HUNDREDS OF
MILLIONS OF DOLLARS IN RANSOM
ISN'T PAID LATER THIS WEEK.
JEFFREY BROWN REPORTS.
>> Brown: THE THREAT CAME AS
JAPANESE PRIME MINISTER SHINZO
ABE MET SEPARATELY WITH
PALESTINIAN AND ISRAELI LEADERS
IN THE MIDDLE EAST.
A NEW VIDEO MESSAGE WARNED
ISLAMIC STATE MILITANTS WILL
BEHEAD TWO JAPANESE HOSTAGES IN
SYRIA, UNLESS TOKYO PAYS A
RANSOM.
>> TO THE JAPANESE PUBLIC:
>> Brown: THE CAPTIVES WERE
IDENTIFIED AS KENJI GOTO, A
FREELANCE JOURNALIST, AND
HARUNA YUKAWA, WHO FOUNDED A
PRIVATE SECURITY FIRM.
THE RANSOM MATCHED JAPAN'S
PLEDGE OF $200 MILLION IN NON-
MILITARY AID TO HELP IRAQ BATTLE
ISLAMIC STATE FORCES, AND TO AID
SYRIAN REFUGEES.
IN JERUSALEM, PRIME MINISTER ABE
WOULD NOT SAY IF HIS GOVERNMENT
WILL PAY, BUT HE DID SAY THAT
SAVING THE HOSTAGES IS THE TOP
PRIORITY.
>> ( translated ): IT IS AN
UNACCEPTABLE ACT TO THREATEN US
IN EXCHANGE FOR HUMAN LIVES, AND
I FEEL ANGRY ABOUT IT.
I STRONGLY URGE THEM TO
IMMEDIATELY RELEASE THE HOSTAGES
WITHOUT HARMING THEM.
>> Brown: THIS APPEARS TO BE THE
FIRST TIME THE ISLAMIC STATE HAS
MADE A RANSOM DEMAND PUBLIC.
U.S. OFFICIALS SAY THE FAMILY OF
JAMES FOLEY REJECTED A PRIVATE
DEMAND FOR $130 MILLION.
FOLEY, ALONG WITH FELLOW
AMERICANS PETER KASSIG AND
STEVEN SOTLOFF WERE LATER
BEHEADED.
>> Brown: JOINING ME NOW IS
AUTHOR AND 21-YEAR C.I.A.
VETERAN BOB BAER.
HIS LATEST BOOK IS CALLED "THE
PERFECT KILL: 21 LAWS FOR
ASSASSINS."
LET'S START WITH THE DEMAND FOR
MONEY.
IF THIS IS, IN FACT, THE FIRST
TIME IT'S BEEN MADE SO PUBLICLY,
WHAT DO YOU MAKE OF THAT?
>> WELL, I THINK THE ISLAMIC
STATE IS SUFFERING ECONOMICALLY.
I THINK THEY NEED THE MONEY.
IT'S SO-CALLED OIL SALES HAVE
RUN OUT, ESPECIALLY WITH THE
PRICE OF OIL DOWN, THEY'RE
EMBATTLED AND, YOU KNOW, IT'S
SORT OF WELL KNOWN IN THESE
CIRCLES THAT THE FRENCH FIRST
STARTED PAYING TO GET HOSTAGES
OUT.
THE FRENCH SET A PRICE AND, IN
FACT, THE HOSTAGES WERE
RELEASED.
SUBSEQUENTLY VARIOUS N.G.O.s,
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS ALSO
PAID RANSOMS AND THERE'S BEEN A
PRECEDENT AND THE ISLAMIC STATE
NEEDS MONEY.
>> Brown: IN THIS CASE,
CLEARLY NO COINCIDENCE BETWEEN
THE DEMAND PORE THE SAME AMOUNT
THE JAPANESE ARE GIVING FOR
NON-MILITARY AID?
>> EXACTLY.
I THINK IT'S WILD THE JA
HAVE OFFERED THE AID TO IRAQ.
MOST OF WHAT THEY OFFERED TO
IRAQ SIMPLY BECAUSE IRAQ IS IN A
WAR WITH THE SUNNI AND SHIA, AND
THE JAPANESE ARE SO SLOW TO GET
INVOLVED IN THOSE CONFLICTS AND
ARE TAKE GETTING INVOLVED.
>> Brown: HOW UNUSUAL IS IT TO
SEE I.S. TARGETING A COUNTRY
LIKE JAPAN.
HAVE WE SEEN ANYTHING LIKE THAT?
>> I HAVE NEVER SEEN THE ISLAMIC
STATE TARGET NON-COMBATIVE
STATES.
THERE MAY WITH SOME N.G.O.s
THEY TRADED FOR MONEY, BUT
GENERALLY THEY'RE AFTER AMERICAN
CITIZENS, FRENCH, ANYBODY WHO'S
BOMBING THEM, THOSE ARE THEIR
PREFERRED HOSTAGES.
SO GOING AFTER THE JAPANESE --
WELL, THERE'S ANOTHER SIDE TO
THIS, OF COURSE, AND THEY'VE
PROBABLY RUN OUT OF HOSTAGES AS
WELL TO TRADE, SO THEY'VE MOVED
DOWN THE LIST TO THE JAPANESE.
>> Brown: WHAT DO WE KNOW
ABOUT THE EXPERIENCE OF DEAL
WITH OR NEGOTIATING WITH I.S.
BASED ON THESE OTHER EXAMPLES?
>> I'M IN TOUCH WITH PEOPLE WHO
HAVE NEGOTIATED WITH THE ISLAMIC
STATE, AND THEY'VE SAID,
FRANKLY, THESE PEOPLE HAVE DEALT
WITH HAMAS, AL QUAIDA, BEEN IN
SOMALIA FOR YEARS AND THEY'VE
NEVER SEEN A GROUP THAT IS MORE
PARANOID -- THEY USE THE WORD
PSYCHOTIC -- UNPREDICTABLE.
BUT THEY FOLLOWED THROUGH AND
RELEASED HOSTAGES WHEN THEY WERE
PAID MONEY.
ALSO, IT'S INTERESTING, IF THE
ISLAMIC STATE IS USING ENCRYPTED
EMAIL TO NEGOTIATE, SO THEY'RE
VERY CONSCIOUS OF NOT LEAVING A
TRAIL BEHIND.
>> Brown: WE HEARD THAT VOICE
OF THE I.S. KIDNAPPER, A
FAMILIAR VOICE, I THINK, WITH A
BRITISH ACCENT.
>> YEAH, IT'S JIHADI JOHN.
I REALIZE THE F.B.I. DIRECTOR
HAS SAID THEY KNOW WHO IT IS.
ON THE OTHER HAND, I'VE HEARD
LAW ENFORCEMENT PEOPLE IN
WASHINGTON TELL ME THEY STILL
HAVEN'T IDENTIFIED HIM AND ARE
NOT QUITE SURE.
SO I'M NOT QUITE SURE WHAT HIS
TRUE NAME IS BUT THAT'S
CERTAINLY THE SAME ACCENT.
ALL THESE HOSTAGE-TAKERS, BY THE
WAY, ARE FOREIGNERS, MOSTLY
WESTERN EUROPEANS, AND, OF
COURSE, THEY WOULD BE ABLE TO
SPEAK ENGLISH TO THE JAPANESE
HOSTAGES.
>> Brown: WHAT DO YOUR SOURCES
TELL YOU ABOUT HOW ORGANIZED
THESE KIDNAPPINGS ARE IN THESE
RANSOM OFFERS?
I FACTIONS OR WELL
ORGANIZED BY GROUP?
>> THINK THEY THEY JUST BELONG
TO THEIR WING OF THE ISLAMIC
STATE.
THERE'S NO EVIDENCE THAT THESE
PEOPLE ARE FREELANCING IT.
YOU KNOW, IT'S A POLICY DECISION
MADE BY THE SUPREME LEADER OF
THE ISLAMIC STATE, ABU BAKR
AL-BAGHDADI.
SO THEY KNOW WHAT THEY'RE DOING.
FOR A WHILE THEY THOUGHT THE
ISLAMIC STATE IS ON A CHARM
OFFENSIVE, BUT THAT'S CLEARLY
NOT TRUE AND IT'S POSSIBLE IF
THE DEMANDS ARE NOT MET IN THE
NEXT 72 HOURS THAT THEY WILL
EXECUTE THEM.
>> Brown: AND BRIEFLY, YOU
SAID THEY THINK THEY NEED MORE
MONEY, THAT WOULD SUGGEST MORE
KIDNAPPINGS AND MORE RANSOM.
>> I THINK THERE ARE MORE
KIDNAPPINGS GOING ON THAN WE
KNOW OF, FOR INSTANCE, IRAQIS OR
SYRIANS, PRIVATE NEGOTIATIONS
THEY'RE GETTING MONEY FOR.
ALL THE OIL INCOME COMING OUT OF
IRAQ IS GOING TO THE GOVERNMENT
OF BAGHDAD OR THE KURDS, AND
THEY'RE UP TO 4 MILLION BARRELS.
SO THE SUNNI, WHETHER THE
ISLAMIC STATE OR TRIBES IN THE
al-ANBAR PROVINCE ARE FEELING
AN ECONOMIC PINCH IN ADDITION TO
THE BOMBINGS, OF COURSE.
>> Brown: ROBERT BAER.
THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: IT WAS A DAY OF
DECISIONS AND ARGUMENTS AT THE
U.S. SUPREME COURT.
JUSTICES RULED IN FAVOR OF AN
ARKANSAS PRISONER WHO WANTED TO
GROW A BEARD FOR RELIGIOUS
REASONS BUT HAD BEEN BARRED FROM
DOING SO BECAUSE OF PRISON
RULES.
AND, THE JUSTICES HEARD A CASE
THAT COULD UNRAVEL STATE LAWS
AROUND THE COUNTRY REGARDING
JUDICIAL CANDIDATES SOLICITING
CAMPAIGN DONATIONS.
WE ARE JOINED NOW BY NEWSHOUR
CONTRIBUTOR MARCIA COYLE OF THE
NATIONAL LAW JOURNAL.
MARCIA, LET'S TALK FIRST ABOUT
THIS UNANIMOUS DECISION HAVING
TO DO WITH THE CASE WE JUST
DESCRIBED, A PRISONER IN
ARKANSAS WHO WANTED TO GROW AAR.
>> RIGHT.
>> Woodruff: HE EASE A MUSLIM.
TELL US ABOUT THIS.
>> RIGHT.
GREGORY HOLT CLAIMED THE NO
BEARD POLICY BY ARKANSAS
VIOLATED HIS RIGHT UNDER A
FEDERAL LAW KNOWN AS THE
RELIGIOUS LAND USE AND
INSTITUTIONALIZED PERSON ACT OF
2000, AND THAT ACT PROHIBITS THE
GOVERNMENT FROM SUBSTANTIALLY
BURDENING AN INSTITUTIONALIZED
PERSON'S RELIGIOUS EXPRESSION
UNLESS THE GOVERNMENT CHOOSES
THE LEAST RESTRICTIVE MEANS TO
ACHIEVE A COMPELLING GOVERNMENT
INTEREST.
ARKANSAS DEFENDED ITS POLICY IN
THE SUPREME COURT SAYING IT HAD
TWO COMPELLING INTERESTS.
IT WANTED TO CUT BACK ON THE
HIDING OF CONTRABAND WITHIN
BEARDS.
IT ALSO WANTED TO ENSURE QUICK
IDENTIFICATION OF PRISONERS WHO
MIGHT BY GROWING BEARDS ALTER
THEIR APPEARANCE AND GET INTO
FORBIDDEN AREAS OF A PRISON.
JUSTICE ALITO WROTE FOR A
UNANIMOUS SUPREME COURT TODAY
AND SAID THE KURT DOESN'T REALLY
QUESTION THE COMPELLING
INTERESTS BUT THE PROBLEM WAS
THAT ARKANSAS DID NOT CHOOSE THE
LEAST RESTRICTIVE MEANS HERE TO
ACHIEVE THEM.
FOR EXAMPLE, THE CONTRABAND
ISSUE, HE SAID IT'S VERY HARD TO
BELIEVE THAT A PRISONER COULD
HIDE CONTRABAND LIKE RAZOR BLADE
IN A HALF-INCH BEARD.
HE SAID THEY ALLOWED PRISONERS
TO GROW HAIR LONG AND SEARCHED
THE HAIR, WHY NOT DO IT WITH
BEARDS.
THEN ON THE QUICK IDENTIFICATION
OF PRISONERS, HE SAID WHY NOT A
BEFORE AND AFTER PHOTOGRAPH THAT
YOU CAN USE?
SO IT'S A VERY STRAIGHTFORWARD
OPINION.
>> Woodruff: AND, AGAIN,
UNANIMOUS.
>> YES.
I'D LIKE TO POINT OUT 43 STATES
AND THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT ALLOW
BEARDS ON PRISONERS, SOME EVEN
LONGER THAN A HALF INCH.
>> Woodruff: LET ME ASK YOU
ABOUT SOMETHING ELSE.
THE COURT ALSO HEARD AN ARGUMENT
TODAY IN A FLORIDA CASE
INVOLVING CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS
TO CANDIDATES FOR JUDICIAL
OFFICE.
TELL US ABOUT THE ARGUMENT.
>> OKAY.
THIS WAS A CHALLENGE UNDER THE
FIRST AMENDMENT BY A WOMAN WHO
HAD RUN FOR A COUNTY COURT SEAT
AND SHE LOST.
SHE WAS CHALLENGING THE FLORIDA
BAR -- OR ACTUALLY IT'S THE
JUDICIAL ETHICS RULE, DEFENDED
BY THE FLORIDA BAR, THAT
PROHIBIT JUDICIAL CANDIDATES
FROM DIRECTLY SOLICITING
CONTRIBUTIONS IN THEIR
CAMPAIGNS.
BUT THE RULE ALLOWS THE JUDICIAL
CANDIDATE TO CREATE A CANDIDATE
COMMITTEE TO SOLICIT THOSE
CONTRIBUTIONS UNDER THE
CANDIDATE'S NAME AND ALSO ALLOWS
THE CANDIDATE TO WRITE THANK YOU
NOTES FOR CONTRIBUTIONS.
SO IN THE ARGUMENTS TODAY, THE
COURT APPEARED DIVIDED OVER WHAT
TO DO HERE.
A VERY SIMILAR DIVIDE TO ALL OF
ITS CAMPAIGN FINANCE CASES
RECENTLY.
ON THE ONE HAND YOU HAD CHIEF
JUSTICE ROBERTS BASICALLY
SAYING, LOOK, WHEN A STATE MAKES
A FUNDAMENTAL DECISION TO ELECT
ITS JUDGES, IT'S PUTTING THEM
INTO THE POLITICAL FRAY, AND
ELECTION SPEECHES AT THE CORE OF
FIRST AMENDMENT PROTECTION.
THEN, ON THE OTHER HAND, YOU HAD
SOME OF THE COURT'S MORE LIBERAL
JUSTICES LIKE JUSTICE BREYER AND
SOTOMAYOR SAYING THEY AREN'T
LIKE OTHER POLITICAL OFFICES.
JUDICIAL CANDIDATES ARE SUPPOSED
TO BE NEUTRAL ANDISM PARABLE.
SO YOU SAW THE DIVIDE PLAYING
OUT AS THE FLORIDA BAR DEFENDED
THE RULES SAYING WE'RE TRYING TO
ELIMINATE THE DIRECT LINK
BETWEEN THE JUDICIAL CANDIDATE
AND THE CONTRIBUTOR.
THAT IS A LINK THAT CREATES
EITHER THE APPEARANCE OR ACTUAL
CORRUPTION, AND IT DIMINISHES
PUBLIC CONFIDENCE IN THE
JUDICIARY.
>> Woodruff: QUICKLY, WHAT
PIECE OF THE CONSTITUTION IS AT
PLAY HERE?
>> THIS IS THE FIRST AMENDMENT.
LIKE I SAID, ELECTION SPEECH,
EVEN IF IT INVOLVES MONEY, IS AT
THE CORE OF FIRST AMENDMENT
PROTECTIONS.
>> Woodruff: ONE OTHER SHORT
THING I WANT TO MENTION, MARCIA,
WE KNOW THE JUSTICES DECLINED TS
TODAY BUT A NUMBER INVOLVE THE
STORY WE'VE DONE ON THE
"NewsHour" INVOLVING SO-CALLED
BURN PITS IN WAR ZONES AND IRAQ
AND AFGHANISTAN WHERE CHEMICALS
ARE USED AND THE TROOPS HAVE
EXPERIENCED AFTEREFFECTS OF
BREATHING IN FROM THESE BURN
PITS.
>> RIGHT.
>> Woodruff: THIS MEAN CLASS
ACTION SUITS, AS I UNDERSTAND
IT, CAN GO FORWARD.
>> A LARGE NUMBER OF SUITS WERE
FILED BY U.S. MILITARY
SERVICEMEMBERS WHO CLAIMED
INJURY DUE TO EXPOSURE TO THE
CHEMICALS AND THE TOXIC FUMES
COMING OUT OF THE OPEN-AIR BURN
PITS.
THE SUPREME COURT DECLINED
REVIEW.
IT WAS AN APPEAL BROUGHT BY THE
CONTRACTOR WHO OPERATED THE BURN
PITS, KELLOGG BROWN & ROOT, AND
BY DECLINING THAT APPEAL, WHICH
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION ALSO
SAID TO THE COURT DECLINED THE
APPALE, IT LEFT IN PLACE A
FEDERAL APPELLATE COURT DECISION
SAYING, LOOK, THESE CLAIMS
SHOULD GO FORWARD.
THE DISTRICT COURT DISMISSED
THEM TOO QUICKLY.
THERE WASN'T ENOUGH EVIDENCE IN
THE RECORD FOR THE DISTRICT
COURT TO DISMISS THEM.
SO THE PROCESS WE CALL DISCOVERY
WILL GO FORWARD ON THE CLAIMS.
THE PEOPLE BRINGING THEM LIVE TO
FIGHT ANOTHER DAY.
>> Woodruff: INTERESTING,
MARCIA COYLE.
THANK YOU.
>> MY PLEASURE, JUDY.
>> Ifill: NOW, A COLORADO COURT
TACKLES THE JOB OF PICKING A
JURY FOR ONE OF THE DEADLIEST
MASS SHOOTINGS IN U.S. HISTORY.
THE PROCESS BEGAN TODAY, TWO AND
A HALF YEARS AFTER THE KILLINGS
IN A CROWDED MOVIE THEATER
OUTSIDE DENVER.
IT WAS JULY 20, 2012.
A MIDNIGHT SCREENING OF A BATMAN
MOVIE, WHEN A GUNMAN OPENED FIRE
AT THIS THEATER IN AURORA.
12 PEOPLE DIED AND ANOTHER 70
WERE WOUNDED.
>> IT WAS JUST CHAOS.
YOU SAW INJURED PEOPLE YOU SAW,
THERE WAS THIS ONE GUY ON ALL
FOURS CRAWLING.
THERE WAS THIS GIRL SPITTING UP
BLOOD.
THERE WERE BULLET HOLES IN SOME
PEOPLE'S BACKS, SOME PEOPLE'S
ARMS.
>> Ifill: JAMES HOLMES WAS
ARRESTED MINUTES LATER IN THE
PARKING LOT, WEARING A GAS MASK,
HELMET AND BODY ARMOR.
TODAY, THE SCENE SHIFTED TO THE
ARAPAHOE COUNTY COURTHOUSE.
THE 27-YEAR-OLD DEFENDANT SAT
QUIETLY WITH HIS DEFENSE TEAM,
AS THE COURT BAN SEGCREENING
7,000 POTENTIAL JURORS-- A
PAINSTAKING PRESS OCTHAT COULD
LAST UNTIL LATE MAY OR EARLY
JUNE.
HOLMES HAS PLEADED NOT GUILTY BY
REASON OF INSANITY TO 166 COUNTS
OMURDF ER, ATTEMPTED MURDER AND
EXPLOSIVES CHARGES.
HIS DEFENSE ATTORNEYS ARGUE HE
WAS IN THE THROES OF A PSYCHOTIC
EPISODE THAT NIGHT.
IF HOLMES IS CONVICTED, HE COULD
FACE THE DEATH PENALTY.
BUT IF JURORS ACCEPT HIS
DEFENSE, HE'LL BE COMMITTED TO A
STATE MENTAL HOSPITAL
INDEFINITELY.
FOR MORE ON THE BEGINNING OF
WHAT IS SURE TO BE A LENGTHY
TRIAL, WE ARE JOINED BY MARY
MacCARTHY OF "FEATURE STORY
NEWS."
SHE WAS IN THE COURTROOM TODAY.
MARY MacCARTHY, HOW ARE THEY
GOING ABOUT NARROWING DOWN OR
FINDING AN IMPARTIAL JURY IN
SUCH A NOTORIOUS CASE?
IS.
>> THEY'RE DOING IT BY MAKING
HISTORY.
THEY SENT OUT A TOTAL OF 9,000
JURY SUMMONSES.
WITH WE FOUND OUT THE INITIAL
GROUP WAS WHITTLED DOWN ALREADY
TO 7,000 BECAUSE 2,000 OF THE
PEOPLE WHO RECEIVED SUMMONSES
EITHER HAD A CONNECTION TO THE
CASE OR THE SUMMONS WAS
UNDELIVERABLE.
THE JUDGE SAID TODAY HE HOPES
THAT OF THOSE 7,000 THEY WILL
ACTUALLY HAVE TO CALL IN OR SEE
IN THE COURTROOM SOMEWHERE
BETWEEN 3,000 AND $3,800 AND,
FROM THAT, WHITTLE THE GROUP
DOWN TO BETWEEN 100 AND 120.
FROM THAT, THEY WILL FIND 24
JURORS WHO THEY HOPE CAN SERVE
ON THIS.
12 ACTUAL JURORS, 12 ALTERNATES.
SO, AGAIN, PEOPLE WHO CAN GIVE
UP MANY MONTHS OF THEIR LIFE.
THEY'RE SAYING THE ACTUAL TRIAL
PROPER WILL START IN MAY OR JUNE
AND EASILY GO UNTIL OCTOBER.
A PROSECUTION LAWYER TALKING
ABOUT SCHEDULING ISSUES IN THE
COURTROOM TODAY RAISED THE ISSUE
OF SOME DATES IN OCTOBER AND
NOBODY BATTED AND EYELID.
SO WE'RE LOOKING AT A TRIAL THAT
COULD EASILY TAKE UP MUCH OF
2015.
>> Ifill: JAMES HOLMES WAS IN
THE COURTROOM TODAY.
YOU'VE SEEN HIM BEFORE IN THIS
SETTLE.
WE'VE JUST SEEN PICTURES OF THE
ORANGE HAIR AND KIND OF WILD
EYES.
WHAT WAS HE LIKE TODAY?
>> DRAMATICALLY DIFFERENT TODAY.
WE DON'T HAVE VIDEO COMING OUT
OF THE CROOM BECAUSE THE
TELEVISED HEARINGS WILL BEGIN
WITH THE HEARINGS PROPER, NOT
THE JURY SELECTION.
SO COMING OUT OF THE COURTROOM
TODAY WE ONLY HAVE SKETCHES BUT
WHEN I WALKED INTO THE COURTROOM
LIKE MANY OF THE MEDIA THERE, AT
FIRST WE DIDN'T REALIZE ONE OF
THE PEOPLE SITTING WITH THE
DEFENSE TEAM WAS THE SUSPECT
HIMSELF BECAUSE HE LOOKED SO
DIFFERENT.
IN THE PAST, HE'S ALWAYS BEEN
WEARING THE PRISON GARB, THE
BRIGHT ORANGE, WHEREAS TODAY HE
WAS IN STREET CLOTHES, A NICE
SPORTS JACKET, DRESS SHIRT,
KHAKIS.
HE HAD NICE BURGUNDY-COLORED,
DARK GLASSES AND HE LOOKED VERY
SPRUCED UP.
THERE WAS ALSO A DRAMATIC
DIFFERENCE IN HIS DEMEANOR.
FOR THE FIRST TIME I'VE SEEN
HIM, HE DIDN'T LOOK DAZED, HE
DIDN'T LOOK SORT OF OUT OF IT.
HE LOOKED ATTENTIVE, ENGAGED.
IN FACT, HE WAS CHATTING WITH
ONE OF THE LEAD DEFENSE LAWYERS,
TAMARA BRADY, SITTING NEXT TO
HIM, AND SORT OF LAUGHING AND
LIGHT HEARTED, NOT IN A
DISTINCTFUL WAY, BUT LOOKING
RELAXED FOR THE FIRST TIME IN
THE COURTROOM.
>> Ifill: HE HAS ADMITTED TO
THE SHOOTING BUT IS CLAIMING
INSANITY.
HOW DOES THIS CASE COMPARE TO
OTHER MASS SHOOTING TRIALS WE'VE
SEEN IN.
>> THIS IS VERY RARE.
AS WE NOW, MASS SHOOTINGS ARE
QUITE COMMON, ACCORDING TO THE
F.B.I., ABOUT 16 PER YEAR.
THIS IS ONE WHERE BOTH THE MAG
TOD OF THE VICTIMS, IT WAS 12
PEOPLE KILLED ANT ANOTHER 58
SERIOUSLY INJURED, EVEN THOR
JARED BEYOND THAT, BUT 58 PEOPLE
SUFFERING FROM SERIOUS INJURIES,
AND IT'S SIMPLY RARE THE SHOOTER
SURVIVES.
MANY ARE COMPARING IT TO THE
BOSTON MARATHON BOMBING CASE
BECAUSE THE CRIMES AFFECTED A
HUGE COMMUNITY IN WHICH THE
PERPETRATOR SURVIVED.
AS WE KNOW, IN MOST SHOOTINGS,
THE ASSAILANT IS EITHER SHOT BY
POLICE OR TURNS THE GUN ON
HIMSELF.
>> Ifill: CERTAINLY THAT WAS
THE CASE IN COLUMBINE WHICH CAST
A SHADOW OVER THIS CASE.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
IT'S IMPORTANT TO NOTE IN
COLORADO EVEN THOUGH THE MASS
SHOOTINGS ARE HAPPENING
EVERYWHERE, BOTH THE COLUMBINE
HIGH SCHOOL SHOOTING IN 1999 AND
THE AURORA THEATER SHOOTING IN
2012 ARE THINGS THAT STAND OUT
FOR THE COMMUNITY HERE.
THERE HAS BEEN SOLIDARITY AMONG
THE VICTIMS, HELPING EACH OTHER
OUT, THE FAMILIES EVEN JOINING
CAUSES WITH MANY OF THEM WORKING
TOWARDS THINGS LIKE GUN CONTROL,
BETTER TREATMENT FOR MENTAL
ILLNESS.
BUT I CAN SAY AS A LONG-TIME
RESIDENT OF COLORADO, BOTH OF
THESE SHOOTINGS HAVE CAST A
PALLOR OVER OUR STATE IS
SOMETHING THAT'S COMING TO MIND
FOR THE VICTIMS AS THEY HAVE TO
DEAL WITH THIS PROCESS, NOW
PERHAPS ANOTHER EIGHT MONTHS OR
LONGER OF THE TRIAL BEING IN THE
HEADLINES EVERY DAY IS GOING TO
RAISE A LOT O OF PAINFUL MEMORIS
FOR THEM.
>> Ifill: MARY MacCARTHY,
FEATURE STORY NEWS, THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT,
ONE OF THE PERPETUAL CHALLENGES
FACING EDUCATORS IS FINDING WAY
TO MAKE SCHOOL RELEVANT IN THE
LIVES OF STUDENTS.
A SCHOOL IN OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA
HAS FOUND SUCCESS BY DESIGNING
LESSONS MAKING THOSE LINKS MUCH
CLOSER BETWEEN THE CLASSROOM AND
THE WORKING WORLD.
THE NEWSHOUR'S APRIL BROWN
REPORTS AS PART OF OUR "AMERICAN
GRADUATE" PROJECT, A PUBLIC
MEDIA INITIATIVE FUNDED BY
THE CORPORATION FOR PUBLIC
BROADCASTING.
>> Reporter: THIS IS PROBABLY
NOT THE KIND OF LESSON YOU'D
EXPECT HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS TO
BE GETTING.
>> Reporter: LEARNING SIDE-BY-
SIDE WITH EMERGENCY MEDICAL
TECHNICIANS IN-TRAINING ABOUT
HOW TO DELIVER A BABY.
>> YOU WANT TO MAKE SURE THE
SHODER ULDOESN'T GET CAUGHT.
>> Reporter: ADMINISTERING CPR--
THE BEST WAY TO APPLY A
TOURNIQUET, AND HOW TO CHECK A
PATIENT'S BLOOD PRESSURE
GETTING A GRASP ON THE BASICS OF
THE MEDICAL PROFESSION IS A
RGE LAPART OF THE CURRICULUM AT
LIFE ACADEMY OF HEALTH AND BIO-
SCIENCE, A SIXTH-THROUGH-12TH
GRADE PUBLIC SCHOOL IN EAST
OAKLAND, ONE OF THE POOREST
SECTIONS IN THE CITY.
>> 91% OF OUR KIDS ARE LCFF OR
FREE AND REDUCED LUNCH.
ALL STUDENTS OF COLOR AND MOST
OF THEIR FAMILIES HAVE BEEN
EDUCATED UP TO ABOUT SIXTH
GRADE.
>> Reporter: PRESTON THOMAS IS
THE PRINCIPAL AT LIFE ACADEMY,
WHICH WAS FOUNDED IN 2001 WITH
THE GOAL OF PREPARING LOW-INCOME
AND MINORITY STUDENTS FOR HEALTH
SCIENCE CAREERS.
THE SCHOOL USES AN EDUCATIONAL
APPROACH OFTEN FOUND IN MORE
AFFLUENT DISTRICTS KNOWN AS
LINKED LEARNING.
THE MODEL INTEGRATES ACADEMICS
WITH CAREER-BASED TRAINING AND A
WORKPLACE ENVIRONMENT.
>> WE HAVE KIDS THAT GO TO EVERY
MAJOR HOSPITAL IN OAKLAND AND
THEY ARE STARTING TO TAKE SOME
OF THE REAL WORLD PRACTICAL
SKILLS THAT THEY ARE LEARNING ON
THE INTERNSHIPS BUT ALSO THE
THINGS THAT WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
IN CLASS AND THEY ARE STARTING
TO SYNTHESIZE THAT INTO THE
VISION THAT THEY SEE FOR
THEMSELVES.
>> Reporter: THE NEARLY 500
STUDENTS HERE PICK ONE OF THREE
CAREER PATHWAYS: MEDICINE,
MENTAL HEALTH OR BIOTECHNOLGY.
MANY OF THEM, INCLUDING JORGE
RUIZ, COMPLETE A TWO-AND A HALF
YEAR INTERNSHIP WITH CHILDREN'S
HOSPITAL INAKL OAND, ROTATING
THROUGH DIFFERENT DEPARTMENTS.
AND TAKING FIELD TRIPS TO PLACES
LIKE FAST RESPONSE, WHERE THEY
LEARNED ABOUT WHAT HAPPENS
DURING CHILDBIRTH.
RUIZ, A SENIOR, IS ALREADY USING
HIS TRAINING OUTSIDE THE
CLASSROOM, HELPING HIS MOM TAKE
CARE OF HIS TWO SISTERS.
>> MY TWO OLDER SISTERS ARE BOTH
DISABLED, MY OLDEST HER NAME IS
STEPHANIE SHE HAS CEREBRAL PALSY
MY SECOND OLDER SISTER LILIANA
HAS CEREBRAL PALSY QUADRIPLEGIA
WHICH ALSO COMES ALONG WITH
ASTHMA, SCOLIOSIS, EPILEPSY, SHE
FEEDS THROUGH A G-TUBE.
>>epor Rter: IN ADDITION TO THE
LINKED LEARNING APPROACH, LIFE
ACADEMY ALSO CREATED A STUDENT-
CENTERED LEARNING ENVIRONMENT,
WHICH MEANS THE SCHOOL WORK IS
COLLABORATIVE, CHALLENGING,
RELEVANT, AND CONNECTED TO REAL
LIFE SITUATIONS.
>> WHEN HE WAS DEPORTED, I NEVER
REALLY HAD A CHANCE TO SAY
GOODBYE.
HAPPENED IN THE MORNING WHEN HE
WAS GOING OFF TO WORK.
THE STORIES THAT HE WAS PULLED
OVER AND THEY TOOK HIM.
>> WHEN YOU ENGAGE KIDS INTO
WHAT'S HAPPENING NOW, IT'S MORE
REAL AND LIVE AND MAKES THEM
EXCITED ABOUT POLITICS RATHER
THAN TALKING ABOUT SOMETHING
THREE YEARS AGO I DEVELOPED IN
MY TEACHING.
>> IT'S HEALTH CAREERS THAT
STRUCK PEARNL CORD WITH JUNIOR.
>> MY MOM IS AN ALCOHOLIC AND
SHE'S BEEN AN ALCOHOLIC FOR HER
WHOLE LIFE AND SHE'S BEEN
HOSPITALIZED.
I WOULD LOVE TO HELP PEOPLE WHO
STRUGGLE WITH THAT, TOO.
>> THE STUDIES HAVE SHOWN LINKED
LEARNING AND STUDENT-CENTERED
LEARNING CAN IMPROVE
ACHIEVEMENT, THE CHALLENGES OF
EVERYDAY LIFE CAN BE DIFFICULT
TO DEAL WEATHER.
THAT'S WHY THE TEACHERS SERVE AS
ADVISORS THAT STAY WITH STUDENTS
THEIR WHOLE CAREER AT LIFE
ACADEMY HELPING THEM OVERCOME
EDUCATIONAL AND PERSONAL
OBSTACLES.
ANNIE HATCH TEACHES HUMANITIES
AND ENGLISH AND IS ANDREA
SIGALA'S ADVISOR.
>> SO ADVISORY IS THE PLACE
WHERE WE SUPPORT THEM WITH
EVERYTHING ELSE YOU KNOW
ACADEMICS BUT ALL THE
INTERPERSONAL SOCIAL FAMILY
STUFF AS WELL, AND I JUST THINK
THIS IS A PLACE WHERE SHE'S FELT
COMFORTABLE EXPRESSING HER
STRUGGLES AND ALSO I THINK SHE
FEELS REALLY SUPPORTED BY HER
CLASSMATES AND HER TEACHERS.
>> Reporter: STUDENTS LIKE
SIGALA WERE ADMITTED TO LIFE
ACADEMY THROUGH AN OPEN
ENROLLMENT LOTTERY, AND LIKE
OTHER OAKLAND SCHOOLS, ITS
FINANCIAL SUPPORT COMES LARGELY
FROM DISTRICT FUNDS
HOWEVER, RESULTS HERE HAVE BEEN
REMARKABLE IN A CITY WHERE ONLY
HALF OF AFRICAN AMERICAN AND
LATINO STUDENTS GRADUATE FROM
HIGH-SCHOOL AND EVEN FEWER
ENROLL IN COLLEGE.
>> SO STUDENTS ARE BEING
PREPARED FOR COLLEGE AND CAREER
TOGETHER, THEY ARE SEEING THE
VALUE OF THE CORE CONTENT, IN
THE PAST WE'VE HAD TWO TRACKS
YOU CAN BE COLLEGE PREP OR YOU
CAN BE CAREER AND THAT WAS AUTO
SHOP OR HOME EC OR THINGS LIKE
THAT BUT NOW WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
REALLY PREPARING KIDS FOR
PROFESSIONAL CAREERS WHERE THE
TWO ARE INTEGRATED.
>> Reporter: DIANE FRIEDLANDER
IS A SENIOR RESEARCHER AT
STANFORD UNIVERSITY, SHE
RECENTLY OVERSAW A STUDY ON LIFE
ACADEMY, THE REPORT SHOWED THAT
AMONG OAKLAND'S PUBLIC HIGH
SCHOOLS, LIFE ACADEMY HAS THE
SECOND HIGHEST RATE OF GRADUATES
WHO GO ON TO ATTEND FOUR-YEAR
UNIVERSITIES.
THAT, FRIEDLANDER BELIEVES, IS
BECAUSE THE SCHOOL MAKES THE
BENEFITS OF LEARNING CLEAR TO
STUDENTS, EVEN THOUGH ALL THE
OPTIONS IN A REGULAR SCHOOL,
LIKE SPORTS AND A MANY
ELECTIVES AREN'T OFFERED HERE.
BUT NOW THAT I KNOW WHAT I WANT
TO DO, I KNOW THAT I WANT TO BE
A DOCTOR SOMEWHERE IN THE
MEDICAL FIELD, I DON'T MISS IT
AS MUCH.
>> Reporter: THE STANFORD
REPORT ALSO NOTES TWO OTHER
ELEMENTS THAT HAVE HELPED
STUDENTS SUCCEED HERE --
ENGAGING PARENTS AND BUILDING
PARTNERSHIPS WITHIN THE
COMMUNITY.
LIFE ACADEMY HOLDS WEEKLY
MEETINGS FOR PARENTS TO GET
UPDATES ON HOW THEIR KIDS ARE
DOING AND HAS SEVERAL HEALTH AND
BIOTECH BUSINESSES AND OAKLAND
IS PARTICIPATING PROVIDING
INTERNSHIPANDS  CAREER
COUNSELING TO STUDENTS.
SHANTA RAMDEHOLL MANAGES THE
STUDENT INTERNSHIP PROGRAM AT
CHILDREN'S HOSPITAL, SHE SAYS
WORKING WITH YOUNG PEOPLE FROM
THE OAKLAND AREA NOT ONLY GIVE
STUDENTS AN IDEA ABOUT FUTURE
CAREERS, AND IT MAY ALSO GROW A
MORE DIVERSE WORKFORCE OF LOCAL
CAREGIVERS.
>> IF WE DON'T DO IT, IT'S A
MISSED OPPORTUNITY, AND BY
GIVING THESE KIDS THAT
OPPORTUNITY, WE KNOW WE'VE
OPENED THEIR EYES.
JUST IMAGINE FOR DOCTORS WHO GO
ON TO MEDICAL SCHOOL, WHAT THESE
KIDS ARE DOING TODAY, IT TAKES
TWO YEARS IN MEDICAL SCHOOL
BEFORE THEY WOULD START
SHADOWING MEDICAL PROVIDERS OR
DOING CERTAIN THINGS THAT THESE
STUDENTS ARE DOING TODAY SO IT
OPENS UP A NEW WORLD FOR THEM.
>> THOSE COOL IDEAS CAN
DEFINITELY AND SHOULD DEFINITELY
BE REPLICATED IN OTHER PLACES,
BUT TO TAKE IT AS A COOKIE
CUTTER MODEL ND PUT IT DOWN IN
ANOTHER SITE WON'T WORK.
THERE WON'T BE OWNERSHIP THAT
WILL BE CONNECTED TO THE
COMMUNITY.
>> Reporter: IN EAST OAKLAND.
PRINCIPAL THOMAS FOUND THESE
OPPORTUNITIES ARE MOTIVATING
KIDS TO CONTINUE THEIR EDUCATION
TO THEY CAN GET THE JOBS THEY
REALLY WANT.
>> WE REALLY WANT STUDENTS AND
FAMILIES TO HAVE THE
OPPORTUNITIES TO ATTEND COLLE
>> WE REALLY WANT STUDENTS AND
FAMILIES TO HAVE THE OPPORTUNITY
TO ATTEND COLLEGE AND NOT JUST,
"YOU'VE QUALIFIED FOR IT," BUT
THAT YOU COULD REALLY SUCCEED AT
IT AND MAKE IT THROUGH THOSE
FOUR YEARS OF COLLEGE WHICH ARE
REALLY RIGOROUS AND REALLY
CHALLENGING FOR STUDENTS THAT
DON'T HAVE ANY FRAMEWORK FOR
UNDERSTANDING WHAT COLLEGE IS
GOING TO BE LIKE BECAUSE THEY
ARE THE FIRST.
AND THE CITY OF OAKLAND RECENTLY
APPROVED A MEASURE THAT WILL
HELP CREATE MORE LINKED LEARNING
OPPORTUNITIES IN ITS SCHOOLS IN
THE NEXT TEN YEARS.
FOR THE PBS "NewsHour", APRIL
BROWN IN OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA.
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY:
PRESIDENT OBAMA PREPARES TO LAY
OUT HIS VIEW OF THE STATE OF THE
UNION.
IN EXCERPTS RELEASED EARLY, HE
WILL SAY AMERICA IS TURNING THE
PAGE AFTER YEARS OF WAR AND
RECESSION.
>> Ifill: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON WEDNESDAY, FULL ANALYSIS OF
THE PRESIDENT'S ADDRESS TO THE
NATION.
I'M GWEN IFILL
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE, AND
TONIGHT AT 9:00 P.M. EASTERN FOR
SPECIAL NEWSHOUR COVERAGE OF THE
STATE OF THE UNION.